# PEEP and IPPV
> Describe the physiological consequences of intermittent positive pressure ventilation and positive end-expiratory pressure.


##Physiological Effects of PEEP
PEEP is defined as a positive airway pressure at the end of expiration. It is distinct from positive airway pressure (which is not confined to a phase of the respiratory cycle) and CPAP (which is a mode of ventilation).

iPEEP refers to **intrinsic PEEP**, auto PEEP or dynamic hyperinflation. In all cases the PEEP is generated by the patient. This occurs in expiration stops before the lung volume reaches FRC. Application of external PEEP may limit the generation of iPEEP by maintaining airway patency in late expiration.


###Respiratory Effects
* Increases lung volume and FRC by an amount proportional to the compliance of the system.
    * Improves oxygenation via alveolar recruitment
    * Improves lung compliance via alveolar recruitment, reducing work of breathing
    * May increase the proportion of West Zone 1 physiology, as when PA exceeds Pa, dead space ventilation occurs

###Cardiovascular Effects
####Cardiac Effects
* Reduction in VR due to increased CVP  
Leads to reduction in RV filling pressure, LV filling, and CO.
    * This is the predominant reason why CO falls with the application of PEEP
    * These changes are more marked in hypovolaemia


* Changes to pulmonary vascular resistance and RV afterload
    * If lung volume is lower than FRC, then PVR will reduce as PEEP stretches open extra-alveolar vessels
        * Alveolar recruitment will reduce hypoxic-pulmonary vasoconstriction, further reducing PVR
    * If lung volume is higher than FRC, then PVR will increase as PEEP compresses alveolar vessels
    * Therefore, PEEP has *variable effects* on RV afterload depending on how it changes lung volume with respect to FRC


* Reduced LV preload due to increased RV afterload
Increased RV afterload may lead to an increased RV EDV, displacing the interventricular septum into the LV, impeding LV diastolic function and reducing LV filling. This is an example of **ventricular interdependence**.


* Reduced LV afterload due to reduced LV transmural pressure  
    * Effects in a well patient are minimal, as PEEP is relatively small in magnitude compared to systemic arterial pressures
    * In patients generating highly negative intrathoracic pressures, the LV transmural pressure can increase markedly, increasing LV afterload and reducing cardiac output

####Peripheral Vasculature Effects
* Reduced urine output due to:
    * Reduced CO and renal blood flow
    * ADH release as a consequence of reduced atrial stretch and ANP release


* Reduced hepatic blood flow due to:
    * Increased CVP and decreased CO lowering the pressure gradient for hepatic flow
        * May result in circulation only intermittently throughout the cardiac cycle

##IPPV
IPPV is the generation of a positive (greater than atmospheric) airway pressure during inspiration. Physiological effects of IPPV are predominantly related to mean airway pressure, and so are generally similar to PEEP, but of reduced magnitude.

###Respiratory
* Reduced V/Q ratio


##References
Nunns
Deranged Physiology PEEP series
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1414045/