README.md, before:

# Part One

Part One is a reference for trainees preparing for the CICM and ANZCA Primary Exams.
* Part One **is**:
    * Designed to cover the ***assessed*** sections of the CICM and ANZCA curricula **in enough detail to pass**
    * A rough guide for the expected depth of knowledge required on a topic
    * A tool to correct your written answers
    * A source of information you might find difficult to find elsewhere
* Part One **is not**:
    * A textbook
    * The definitive guide to the primary exam  
    * A complete reference  
    There will be both omissions and errors. If you find any, please <a href="mailto:jake@jakebarlow.me?Subject=Part%20One" target="_top">let me know</a>.
    

##Layout
The book is divided into three sections:
* **Curriculum**  
Covers statistics, physiology, equipment and measurement, and anatomy.
    * Pages are laid out using the section title, topic titles, and order from the CICM curriculum  
    > A grey block indicates a topic is from the CICM curriculum OR both curricula
    * When a topic is only examinable in the ANZCA curriculum, it has been slotted in somewhere sensible
    > <p style="color:purple";>A purple block indicates a topic is ONLY from the ANZCA curriculum</p>
    * Topics covered by the page are listed at the beginning of each page



        
* **Pharmacopoeia**  
Covers drugs.
    * For the sake of consistency, the *general principles* of pharmacology are covered in the curriculum, whilst the specifics of different agents will be found in the pharmacopoeia. If lost, use the search box.

    
* **Appendices**  
Includes the key definitions, graphs, and equations you should know, as well as sample structures for SAQs.

---

###Acknowledgements + Technical Stuff
Part One is built with a number of [open-source](https://opensource.org/) tools:
* Written in John Gruber's elegant [Markdown](https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/)
* Built and made pretty by the [GitBook toolchain](https://toolchain.gitbook.com/)    
With plugins from:
    * [Ben Lau](https://github.com/L3au) for [automatic timestamps](https://github.com/L3au/gitbook-plugin-git-author)
    * [Michael Jerger](https://github.com/jerger) for [collapsible chapters](https://github.com/DomainDrivenArchitecture/gitbook-plugin-expandable-chapters)
    * [Rishabh Garg](https://github.com/rishabhgrg) for [top navigation](https://github.com/hypertrack/gitbook-plugin-top-nav)
* Equations written in [<span class="texhtml" style="font-family: 'CMU Serif', cmr10, LMRoman10-Regular, 'Nimbus Roman No9 L', 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;">L<span style="text-transform: uppercase; font-size: 70%; margin-left: -0.36em; vertical-align: 0.3em; line-height: 0; margin-right: -0.15em;">a</span>T<span style="text-transform: uppercase; margin-left: -0.1667em; vertical-align: -0.5ex; line-height: 0; margin-right: -0.125em;">e</span>X](https://www.latex-project.org/about/)
* Graphs have been:
    * Written in [PGF/Tikz](https://ctan.org/pkg/pgf) using [texworks](https://www.tug.org/texworks/)
    * Converted to vector graphics with [dvisvgm](https://dvisvgm.de/)
    * Refined with [svgo](https://github.com/svg/svgo)
    * (Some graphs have been taken from open-source sites such as [Wikimedia Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Main_Page). These have been credited where used.)
    
    
* Additionally, chemical structures have been built in [MarvinSketch](https://www.chemaxon.com/products/marvin/marvinsketch/)


###About the Author

Jake Barlow is an Anaesthetic and Intensive Care Registrar from Melbourne, Australia. Interested in all things critical care (with a particular fascination for physiology), as well as biotech, physical computing, teaching, analytics, and outcome prediction in intensive care. Send all comments, criticism, and complaints about Part One to him <a href="mailto:jake@jakebarlow.me?Subject=Part%20One" target="_top">here</a>.

---

###Copyright + Legal
Copyright © 2015-2019 C. Jake Barlow

<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0;max-width:81px;max-height:100px" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/4.0/88x31.png" /></a>This work is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License</a>.

Commit message:

exams 2016-2021A
First batch of exam answers

README.md, after:

# Part One

Part One is a reference for trainees preparing for the CICM and ANZCA Primary Exams.
* Part One **is**:
    * Designed to cover the ***assessed*** sections of the CICM and ANZCA curricula **in enough detail to pass**
    * A rough guide for the expected depth of knowledge required on a topic
    * A tool to correct your written answers
    * A source of information you might find difficult to find elsewhere
* Part One **is not**:
    * A textbook
    * The definitive guide to the primary exam  
    * A complete reference  
    There will be both omissions and errors. If you find any, please <a href="mailto:jake@jakebarlow.me?Subject=Part%20One" target="_top">let me know</a>.
    

##Layout
The book is divided into three sections:
* **Curriculum**  
Covers statistics, physiology, equipment and measurement, and anatomy.
    * Pages are laid out using the section title, topic titles, and order from the CICM curriculum  
    > A grey block indicates a topic is from the CICM curriculum OR both curricula
    * When a topic is only examinable in the ANZCA curriculum, it has been slotted in somewhere sensible
    > <p style="color:purple";>A purple block indicates a topic is ONLY from the ANZCA curriculum</p>
    * Topics covered by the page are listed at the beginning of each page



        
* **Pharmacopoeia**  
Covers drugs.
    * For the sake of consistency, the *general principles* of pharmacology are covered in the curriculum, whilst the specifics of different agents will be found in the pharmacopoeia. If lost, use the search box.

    
* **Appendices**  
Includes the key definitions, graphs, and equations you should know, as well as sample structures for SAQs.

---

###Acknowledgements + Technical Stuff
Part One is built with a number of [open-source](https://opensource.org/) tools:
* Written in John Gruber's elegant [Markdown](https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/)
* Built and made pretty by the [GitBook toolchain](https://toolchain.gitbook.com/)    
With plugins from:
    * [Ben Lau](https://github.com/L3au) for [automatic timestamps](https://github.com/L3au/gitbook-plugin-git-author)
    * [Michael Jerger](https://github.com/jerger) for [collapsible chapters](https://github.com/DomainDrivenArchitecture/gitbook-plugin-expandable-chapters)
    * [Rishabh Garg](https://github.com/rishabhgrg) for [top navigation](https://github.com/hypertrack/gitbook-plugin-top-nav)
* Equations written in [<span class="texhtml" style="font-family: 'CMU Serif', cmr10, LMRoman10-Regular, 'Nimbus Roman No9 L', 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;">L<span style="text-transform: uppercase; font-size: 70%; margin-left: -0.36em; vertical-align: 0.3em; line-height: 0; margin-right: -0.15em;">a</span>T<span style="text-transform: uppercase; margin-left: -0.1667em; vertical-align: -0.5ex; line-height: 0; margin-right: -0.125em;">e</span>X](https://www.latex-project.org/about/)
* Graphs have been:
    * Written in [PGF/Tikz](https://ctan.org/pkg/pgf) using [texworks](https://www.tug.org/texworks/)
    * Converted to vector graphics with [dvisvgm](https://dvisvgm.de/)
    * Refined with [svgo](https://github.com/svg/svgo)
    * (Some graphs have been taken from open-source sites such as [Wikimedia Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Main_Page). These have been credited where used.)
    
    
* Additionally, chemical structures have been built in [MarvinSketch](https://www.chemaxon.com/products/marvin/marvinsketch/)


### About the Author

Jake Barlow is an Anaesthetic and Intensive Care Registrar from Melbourne, Australia. Interested in all things critical care (with a particular fascination for physiology), as well as biotech, physical computing, teaching, analytics, and outcome prediction in intensive care. Send all comments, criticism, and complaints about Part One to him <a href="mailto:jake@jakebarlow.me?Subject=Part%20One" target="_top">here</a>.


### Major Contributors

Stuart Watson is an anaesthetic registrar and Renton Prize winner from St. Vincent's Hospital, Melbourne. He has kindly provided his brilliant primary exam question answers to be included in Part One (the originals can be found on his website [Ketamine Nightmares](https://ketaminenightmares.com/pex/)).

---

### Copyright + Legal
Copyright © 2015-2021 C. Jake Barlow

<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0;max-width:81px;max-height:100px" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/4.0/88x31.png" /></a>This work is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License</a>.
